# LitterProject_2020_Nord
*This repo contains code and data produced during a science project for MSc students at Nor University, Norway, as part of the BIO5020 Landscape Ecology and Nature Management course. The field work was carried out fall 2020, and the excercise resulted in a manuscript that is currently under consideration for publication in a scientific journal.* 

### Abstract 
Garbage pollution is a global environmental problem that occurs in virtually all ecosystems. Scientific research on garbage and its environmental impacts focus predominantly on plastics and the marine environment - also known as the garbage ‘sink’. Little empirical knowledge exists about the distribution and ecological impacts of garbage in terrestrial environments, where most garbage is produced. To start closing that knowledge gap, we investigated the spatial distribution of garbage (i.e. occurrence, abundance, fragment size, and composition of the garbage community) in a cultural landscape in central Norway. In October 2020, we registered and collected garbage in 110 50 × 2 m survey plots that were randomly stratified across 8 land cover types in the landscape. Overall, garbage occurrence and abundance was highest in land cover types related to human activities (i.e. roadside verges, urban areas) or with sink habitat (e.g. beaches). Garbage fragments were overall smallest in urban areas and along roads, and largest in agricultural fields and in edges between agricultural fields and forests. Plastic garbage was by far the most common material type, and certain garbage types occurred to a larger or a lesser extent than expected in certain land cover types (e.g. metal scrap occurred more often at riversides than expected). Our results show that land cover types modulate the occurrence, abundance, fragments size, and community structure of garbage, and that garbage is most present and abundant in or near land cover types associated with high human activities. This knowledge can help inform and optimize garbage management and clean-up activities in terrestrial landscapes. How and to what extent the spatial structure of the garbage community mediates ecological effects across various land cover types remains unknown and warrants further study. 
